docs/README.md, before:

Copyright (C) 2021 Ilya Entin.

# Fast Linux Lockless Client-Server with mixed FIFO and TCP clients, compression and encryption

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites:

This code was built and tested on

1. Ubuntu 24.10\
gcc 14.2.0\
clang 19.1.1\
8GB RAM\
4 cores

and

2. Ubuntu 24.10\
gcc 14.2.0\
clang 19.1.1\
4GB RAM\
4 cores

Note: current gcc versions have documented problems with thread sanitizer.\
For this reason all TSAN builds are made by clang++.\
This limitation will be removed as soon as new versions of gcc/g++ are available.

Any distribution and/or version supporting C++20 is expected to work as well.

Header only boost libraries, currently boost 1_87, must be installed.

lz4 dev version must be installed:\
'sudo scripts/installLZ4.sh'

google tests must be installed:\
'sudo scripts/installGtest.sh'

sudo apt-get install binutils

### Building and Testing

#### Notice:

Simple Diffie-Hellman protocol is replaced with Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (ECDH)

Renamed binaries server -> serverX and client -> clientX to\
avoid collision in scripts.

libcryptopp.a is now recreated by make if necessary.\
No need to run installCryptopp.sh manually.

...

Run './deploy.sh' in the project root, './deploy.sh -h' for details.

## Design

Business logic, tasks multithreading, and communication layer are decoupled.

Encryption: Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (ECDH) protocol is used.\
Symmetric encryption is used after the key is set for each session/client.\
The key is specific for every session/client pair.\
Unlike simple Diffie-Hellman the protocol in use is resistant to\
'Man In The Middle' attack types. Headers being sent with the data\
are encrypted as well.\
The time of exposure of the encryption key in the code is significantly\
shortened by obfuscating the key while not in use with nonce obfuscator.\
The result can be observed by enabling showKey option for the server\
and/or client.\
Closing and restarting the client creates a new encryption key used by a\
client/session pair providing frequent key rotation. Performance impact\
is not significant which can be proven by running runShortSessions.sh script.

Tcp communication layer is using boost Asio library. Every session is running in its own thread\
(io_context per session). This approach has its advantages and disadvantages. There is an\
overhead of context switching but connections are independent hence more reliable, the logic\
is simpler and allows new features like waiting mode, see below.

Session can be extremely short-lived, e.g. it might service one submillisecond request or\
in another extreme it can run for the life time of the server. With this architecture it\
is important to limit creation of new threads and use thread pools. 

This server is using thread pools for both tcp and fifo sessions, see ThreadPool... classes in\
the code. Thread pool creates threads on demand comparing the number of objects of a given\
class and the number of already created threads. This prevents creation of redundant threads\
possible if maximum allowed number of threads were created in advance.

In some cases fifo has better performance and is more secure than tcp. Due to protocol\
with predictable sequence of reads and writes, it is possible to make pipes bidirectional. This\
situation is unlike e.g. chat application or similar when unidirectional fifo is normally used.\
In this application after every write the code closes write file descriptor and opens read fd for the\
same end of the pipe, and so on. This significantly simplifies the setup - one fifo per client. See\
fragments of the configuration in ServerOptions.json for the server and ClientOptions.json for clients.\
Testing showed that performance impact of fd reopening is small.
........

The number and identity of fifo and tcp clients are not known in advance.\
Tcp clients are using the standard ephemeral port mechanism.\
For fifo clients an analogous acceptor method is used.\
The fifo acceptor is a special pipe waiting for a request for a new session\
from the starting client on a blocking fd read open(...) call. The client\
unblocks acceptor by opening its writing end. The server (acceptor) generates\
unique pipe name, creates the pipe and a new session, and sends pipe name to\
the client.\
Only one starting client creates a session at a time. This process is\
syncronized by a named_mutex. Tests show that any number of clients\
can be started concurrently by scripts/checkmulticlients.sh.\
Unique pipe name is an analogy of the unique combination of the ip\
address and ephemeral port in the tcp case.

.........

There are configurable restrictions on the number of tcp and/or fifo sessions the server\
is handling. If a new client exceeds this limit it remains up but enrers a waiting mode.\
When one of the previously started clients exits, the waiting client at the head of the\
queue starts running.\
Another restriction is on the total number of sessions.\
Both restrictions can be applied simultaneously. The second takes precedence.
There can be any number of waiting clients.\
A waiting client can also be closed and tried again later.\
The relevant settings are "MaxTcpSessions", "MaxFifoSessions" and "MaxTotalSessions"\
in ServerOptions.json.

There are no software or hardware restrictions on the number of clients. Observed\
latency is strictly proportional to the number of clients due to increasing load\
on worker threads running processing logic. Only performance is a limiting factor.\
This server was tested with up to 40 clients of mixed types, 20 FIFO and 20 TCP.\
The server and all clients are running on the same desktop. In real case tcp clients\
will run on different hosts.

........

Fifo code is increasing the pipe size to make read and write "atomic".\
This operation requires sudo access if requested size exceeds 1MB\
(with original configuration, buffer size is 64 KB). If more than 1MB is necessary:\
sudo ./serverX\
and\
sudo ./clientX\
in appropriate directories.\
The same for scripts profile.sh and runtests.sh.\
If you do not have sudo access, binaries and scripts will still run for any\
requested size but buffer size will not be changed and setPipeSize(...) will\
log an error "Operation not permitted".\
This option can be disabled altogether by setting\
"SetPipeSize", false in ServerOptions.json and ClientOptions.json.

If fifo is not an option the client can switch to the tcp mode and reconnect to the server without\
stopping the server.

Lockless. Processing batches of requests is lockless. Queues of tasks and sessions are\
still using locks, but this type of locking is relatively rare for large tasks and does not\
affect overall performance.

Memory reuse: server and clients almost do not allocate after short warmup period.

Tuning the memory buffer size allows to reduce memory footprint of the software,\
especially of the client, which can in turn reduce hardware requirements.

Builtin LZ4 compression.

Server allows multi phase request processing. The preprocessor phase in the current code\
is generation of the specific key and sorting requests by this key.

Business logic, compression, task multithreading, and communication layers are decoupled.

Business logic is an example of financial calculations I once worked on. This logic finds keywords in the request from another document and performs financial calculations based on the results of this search. There are 10000 requests in a batch, each of these requests is compared with 1000 entries from another document containing keywords, money amounts and other information. The easy way to understand this logic is to look at the responses with diagnostics turned on. The single feature of this code referred in other parts of the application is a signature of the method taking request string_view as a parameter and returning the response string. Different logic from a different field, not necessarily finance, can be plugged in.

To measure the performance of the system the same batch is repeated in an infinite loop, but every time it is created anew from a source file. The server is processing these batches from scratch in each iteration. With one client processing one batch takes about 10 milliseconds on desktop with 4 CPU cores, 8GB RAM on Ubuntu 24.10. Printing to the terminal doubles the latency, use ./clientX > /dev/null or write output to the file to exclude/reduce printing latency.

To test the code manually (not using deploy.sh):

1. clone the repository

2. build the app

make arguments:

SANITIZE = [ aul | thread |  ] By default disabled.\
  aul stands for address,undefined,leak. aul and thread sanitizers\
  cannot be used together.\
PROFILE = [ 1 | 0 |  ] By default disabled.\
ENABLEPCH = [ 1 | 0 |  ] By default enabled.\
  add 'ENABLEPCH=0' to the make command to disable PCH.\
OPTIMIZE = [ -O3 | any |  ] By default -O3.\
CMPLR = [ clang++ | g++ |  ] By default clang++.

There are four targets:\
serverX clientX testbin runtests.\
runtests is a pseudo target which invokes running\
tests if this target is older than test binary testbin.\
By default all targets are built and tests run:\
'make -j$NUMBER_CORES'\
(NUMBER_CORES is the number of cpu cores (processing units))\
Any combination of targets can be specified, e.g.\
'make -j$NUMBER_CORES serverX clientX'

3. run\
server:

Change settings for FIFO and tcp in ServerOptions.json:

server:\
fifo:\
  "FifoDirectoryName" : "directory anywhere with appropriate permissions",\
  "AcceptorName" : "Acceptor", named pipe for fifo acceptor.

tcp:
  "TcpPort" : "49150",\
  "Timeout" : 5,

client #1:\
communication type:\
  "ClientType" : ["TCP" | "FIFO"]

fifo:\
  "FifoDirectoryName" : "the same as for the server",\
  "AcceptorName" : "Acceptor", the same as for the server

tcp:\
  "ServerHost" : "server hostname",\
  "TcpPort" : "49150"

To start:\
in the server terminal\
cd project_root\
./serverX

in another client terminal\
cd project_root\
./clientX

To run the server outside of the project create a directory, copy serverX binary,\
make a soft link to the project_root/data directory, copy ServerOptions.json\
to this directory, and issue './serverX' command.

Similarly for the client: create a directory, copy binary clientX, make a soft link to data\
directory, copy ClientOptions.json, and run './clientX'.

No special requirements for the hardware.\
Tested on desktop with 4 cores and 8GB RAM to run the server and up to 40 mixed fifo and tcp clients.\
Multiple runtime options are in ServerOptions.json and ClientOptions.json files\
in corresponding directories.

Some of these:

LogThreshold controls the amount of logging selecting one of 5 levels
TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR, ALWAYS, e.g. with setting
"LogThreshold" : "INFO"
log statements with level INFO and higher will be printed.

Compression\
"Compression" : "LZ4"\
If the value is empty or different the compression is disabled.

"Timing" prints elapsed times between selected lines of the code. Currently it shows client latency\
for the batch of 10000 requests and the total run time for the server. See Chronometer class in the code.

"BufferSize" is the maximum size of the aggregated client request.\
This parameter controls the task size(the number of requests in the batch) and\
memory footprint of the server and client. This is important for embedded systems.

"NumberTaskThreads" is the number of worker threads. The default\
value 0 means that the number of threads is std::hardware_concurrency

Client can request diagnostics for a specific task to show details of all stages of business calculations.\
This setting is '"Diagnostics" : true' in the ClientOptions.json. It enables diagnostics\
for that client.

To run Google tests:\
'./testbin'\
or './runtests.sh <number repetitions>' \
in the project root. './runtests.sh -h' for help.

To run the tests from any directory outside of the project\
create a directory anywhere, make a soft link to the\
project_root/data directory in this new directory and copy the binary\
testbin from the project_root, issue './testbin' command.\
Note that testbin is not using program options. Instead, it is using\
defaults.

The simplest test with a single client runs client and server in\
the same project root directory from two terminals. In this case\
a special client directory is not required.

Script profile.sh runs profiling of server and both client types.\
The usage is\
'./profile.sh' in the project root. Two directories for clients\
should exist with necessary files and links.

Scripts longtests.sh and checkcompile.sh run builds and tests with both\
g++ and clang++, with and without sanitizers.\
'./longtests.sh -h' and 'scripts/checkcompile.sh -h' show details.

We run memory and thread sanitizer and performance profiling for every commit.\
Warnings are considered failures.

=======
# Fast Lockless Linux Client-Server with TCP and FIFO clients, compression and encryption

Using both bidirectional named pipes and tcp.\
Lockless: except infrequent queue operations.\
Memory reuse: server and clients almost do not allocate after short warmup period.\
Processing batches of requests  without locking.\
Optimized for cache friendliness.\
Business logic, tasks multithreading, and communication layer are decoupled.

Tuning the memory buffer size allows to reduce memory footprint of the software,\
especially of the client, which can in turn reduce hardware requirements.

Business logic is an example of financial calculations. It can be replaced with any other\
batch processing from a different field, not necessarily financial.

Commit message:

option to use SNAPPY compression

docs/README.md, after:

Copyright (C) 2021 Ilya Entin.

# Fast Linux Lockless Client-Server with mixed FIFO and TCP clients, compression and encryption

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites:

This code was built and tested on

1. Ubuntu 24.10\
gcc 14.2.0\
clang 19.1.1\
8GB RAM\
4 cores

and

2. Ubuntu 24.10\
gcc 14.2.0\
clang 19.1.1\
4GB RAM\
4 cores

Note:
google snappy must be installed:\
current version 1.2.2\
'sudo apt-get install libsnappy-dev'

Note: current gcc versions have documented problems with thread sanitizer.\
For this reason all TSAN builds are made by clang++.\
This limitation will be removed as soon as new versions of gcc/g++ are available.

Any distribution and/or version supporting C++20 is expected to work as well.

Header only boost libraries, currently boost 1_87, must be installed.

lz4 dev version must be installed:\
'sudo scripts/installLZ4.sh'

google snappy dev must be installed:\
current version 1.2.2\
'sudo apt-get install libsnappy-dev'

google tests must be installed:\
'sudo scripts/installGtest.sh'

sudo apt-get install binutils

### Building and Testing

#### Notice:

Simple Diffie-Hellman protocol is replaced with Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (ECDH)

Renamed binaries server -> serverX and client -> clientX to\
avoid collision in scripts.

libcryptopp.a is now recreated by make if necessary.\
No need to run installCryptopp.sh manually.

...

Run './deploy.sh' in the project root, './deploy.sh -h' for details.

## Design

Business logic, tasks multithreading, and communication layer are decoupled.

Encryption: Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (ECDH) protocol is used.\
Symmetric encryption is used after the key is set for each session/client.\
The key is specific for every session/client pair.\
Unlike simple Diffie-Hellman the protocol in use is resistant to\
'Man In The Middle' attack types. Headers being sent with the data\
are encrypted as well.\
The time of exposure of the encryption key in the code is significantly\
shortened by obfuscating the key while not in use with nonce obfuscator.\
The result can be observed by enabling showKey option for the server\
and/or client.\
Closing and restarting the client creates a new encryption key used by a\
client/session pair providing frequent key rotation. Performance impact\
is not significant which can be proven by running runShortSessions.sh script.

Tcp communication layer is using boost Asio library. Every session is running in its own thread\
(io_context per session). This approach has its advantages and disadvantages. There is an\
overhead of context switching but connections are independent hence more reliable, the logic\
is simpler and allows new features like waiting mode, see below.

Session can be extremely short-lived, e.g. it might service one submillisecond request or\
in another extreme it can run for the life time of the server. With this architecture it\
is important to limit creation of new threads and use thread pools. 

This server is using thread pools for both tcp and fifo sessions, see ThreadPool... classes in\
the code. Thread pool creates threads on demand comparing the number of objects of a given\
class and the number of already created threads. This prevents creation of redundant threads\
possible if maximum allowed number of threads were created in advance.

In some cases fifo has better performance and is more secure than tcp. Due to protocol\
with predictable sequence of reads and writes, it is possible to make pipes bidirectional. This\
situation is unlike e.g. chat application or similar when unidirectional fifo is normally used.\
In this application after every write the code closes write file descriptor and opens read fd for the\
same end of the pipe, and so on. This significantly simplifies the setup - one fifo per client. See\
fragments of the configuration in ServerOptions.json for the server and ClientOptions.json for clients.\
Testing showed that performance impact of fd reopening is small.
........

The number and identity of fifo and tcp clients are not known in advance.\
Tcp clients are using the standard ephemeral port mechanism.\
For fifo clients an analogous acceptor method is used.\
The fifo acceptor is a special pipe waiting for a request for a new session\
from the starting client on a blocking fd read open(...) call. The client\
unblocks acceptor by opening its writing end. The server (acceptor) generates\
unique pipe name, creates the pipe and a new session, and sends pipe name to\
the client.\
Only one starting client creates a session at a time. This process is\
syncronized by a named_mutex. Tests show that any number of clients\
can be started concurrently by scripts/checkmulticlients.sh.\
Unique pipe name is an analogy of the unique combination of the ip\
address and ephemeral port in the tcp case.

.........

There are configurable restrictions on the number of tcp and/or fifo sessions the server\
is handling. If a new client exceeds this limit it remains up but enrers a waiting mode.\
When one of the previously started clients exits, the waiting client at the head of the\
queue starts running.\
Another restriction is on the total number of sessions.\
Both restrictions can be applied simultaneously. The second takes precedence.
There can be any number of waiting clients.\
A waiting client can also be closed and tried again later.\
The relevant settings are "MaxTcpSessions", "MaxFifoSessions" and "MaxTotalSessions"\
in ServerOptions.json.

There are no software or hardware restrictions on the number of clients. Observed\
latency is strictly proportional to the number of clients due to increasing load\
on worker threads running processing logic. Only performance is a limiting factor.\
This server was tested with up to 40 clients of mixed types, 20 FIFO and 20 TCP.\
The server and all clients are running on the same desktop. In real case tcp clients\
will run on different hosts.

........

Fifo code is increasing the pipe size to make read and write "atomic".\
This operation requires sudo access if requested size exceeds 1MB\
(with original configuration, buffer size is 64 KB). If more than 1MB is necessary:\
sudo ./serverX\
and\
sudo ./clientX\
in appropriate directories.\
The same for scripts profile.sh and runtests.sh.\
If you do not have sudo access, binaries and scripts will still run for any\
requested size but buffer size will not be changed and setPipeSize(...) will\
log an error "Operation not permitted".\
This option can be disabled altogether by setting\
"SetPipeSize", false in ServerOptions.json and ClientOptions.json.

If fifo is not an option the client can switch to the tcp mode and reconnect to the server without\
stopping the server.

Lockless. Processing batches of requests is lockless. Queues of tasks and sessions are\
still using locks, but this type of locking is relatively rare for large tasks and does not\
affect overall performance.

Memory reuse: server and clients almost do not allocate after short warmup period.

Tuning the memory buffer size allows to reduce memory footprint of the software,\
especially of the client, which can in turn reduce hardware requirements.

Option to use LZ4 or SNAPPY compression.\
Preliminary results show that LZ4 gives better elapsed, compression ratio, and using less memory.\
SNAPPY is simpler to use because it does not require to save uncompressed size.

Server allows multi phase request processing. The preprocessor phase in the current code\
is generation of the specific key and sorting requests by this key.

Business logic, compression, task multithreading, and communication layers are decoupled.

Business logic is an example of financial calculations I once worked on. This logic finds keywords in the request from another document and performs financial calculations based on the results of this search. There are 10000 requests in a batch, each of these requests is compared with 1000 entries from another document containing keywords, money amounts and other information. The easy way to understand this logic is to look at the responses with diagnostics turned on. The single feature of this code referred in other parts of the application is a signature of the method taking request string_view as a parameter and returning the response string. Different logic from a different field, not necessarily finance, can be plugged in.

To measure the performance of the system the same batch is repeated in an infinite loop, but every time it is created anew from a source file. The server is processing these batches from scratch in each iteration. With one client processing one batch takes about 10 milliseconds on desktop with 4 CPU cores, 8GB RAM on Ubuntu 24.10. Printing to the terminal doubles the latency, use ./clientX > /dev/null or write output to the file to exclude/reduce printing latency.

To test the code manually (not using deploy.sh):

1. clone the repository

2. build the app

make arguments:

SANITIZE = [ aul | thread |  ] By default disabled.\
  aul stands for address,undefined,leak. aul and thread sanitizers\
  cannot be used together.\
PROFILE = [ 1 | 0 |  ] By default disabled.\
ENABLEPCH = [ 1 | 0 |  ] By default enabled.\
  add 'ENABLEPCH=0' to the make command to disable PCH.\
OPTIMIZE = [ -O3 | any |  ] By default -O3.\
CMPLR = [ clang++ | g++ |  ] By default clang++.

There are four targets:\
serverX clientX testbin runtests.\
runtests is a pseudo target which invokes running\
tests if this target is older than test binary testbin.\
By default all targets are built and tests run:\
'make -j$NUMBER_CORES'\
(NUMBER_CORES is the number of cpu cores (processing units))\
Any combination of targets can be specified, e.g.\
'make -j$NUMBER_CORES serverX clientX'

3. run\
server:

Change settings for FIFO and tcp in ServerOptions.json:

server:\
fifo:\
  "FifoDirectoryName" : "directory anywhere with appropriate permissions",\
  "AcceptorName" : "Acceptor", named pipe for fifo acceptor.

tcp:
  "TcpPort" : "49150",\
  "Timeout" : 5,

client #1:\
communication type:\
  "ClientType" : ["TCP" | "FIFO"]

fifo:\
  "FifoDirectoryName" : "the same as for the server",\
  "AcceptorName" : "Acceptor", the same as for the server

tcp:\
  "ServerHost" : "server hostname",\
  "TcpPort" : "49150"

To start:\
in the server terminal\
cd project_root\
./serverX

in another client terminal\
cd project_root\
./clientX

To run the server outside of the project create a directory, copy serverX binary,\
make a soft link to the project_root/data directory, copy ServerOptions.json\
to this directory, and issue './serverX' command.

Similarly for the client: create a directory, copy binary clientX, make a soft link to data\
directory, copy ClientOptions.json, and run './clientX'.

No special requirements for the hardware.\
Tested on desktop with 4 cores and 8GB RAM to run the server and up to 40 mixed fifo and tcp clients.\
Multiple runtime options are in ServerOptions.json and ClientOptions.json files\
in corresponding directories.

Some of these:

LogThreshold controls the amount of logging selecting one of 5 levels
TRACE, DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR, ALWAYS, e.g. with setting
"LogThreshold" : "INFO"
log statements with level INFO and higher will be printed.

Compression\
"Compression" : "LZ4" or "SNAPPY"\
If the value is empty or different the compression is disabled.

"Timing" prints elapsed times between selected lines of the code. Currently it shows client latency\
for the batch of 10000 requests and the total run time for the server. See Chronometer class in the code.

"BufferSize" is the maximum size of the aggregated client request.\
This parameter controls the task size(the number of requests in the batch) and\
memory footprint of the server and client. This is important for embedded systems.

"NumberTaskThreads" is the number of worker threads. The default\
value 0 means that the number of threads is std::hardware_concurrency

Client can request diagnostics for a specific task to show details of all stages of business calculations.\
This setting is '"Diagnostics" : true' in the ClientOptions.json. It enables diagnostics\
for that client.

To run Google tests:\
'./testbin'\
or './runtests.sh <number repetitions>' \
in the project root. './runtests.sh -h' for help.

To run the tests from any directory outside of the project\
create a directory anywhere, make a soft link to the\
project_root/data directory in this new directory and copy the binary\
testbin from the project_root, issue './testbin' command.\
Note that testbin is not using program options. Instead, it is using\
defaults.

The simplest test with a single client runs client and server in\
the same project root directory from two terminals. In this case\
a special client directory is not required.

Script profile.sh runs profiling of server and both client types.\
The usage is\
'./profile.sh' in the project root. Two directories for clients\
should exist with necessary files and links.

Scripts longtests.sh and checkcompile.sh run builds and tests with both\
g++ and clang++, with and without sanitizers.\
'./longtests.sh -h' and 'scripts/checkcompile.sh -h' show details.

We run memory and thread sanitizer and performance profiling for every commit.\
Warnings are considered failures.

=======
# Fast Lockless Linux Client-Server with TCP and FIFO clients, compression and encryption

Using both bidirectional named pipes and tcp.\
Lockless: except infrequent queue operations.\
Memory reuse: server and clients almost do not allocate after short warmup period.\
Processing batches of requests  without locking.\
Optimized for cache friendliness.\
Business logic, tasks multithreading, and communication layer are decoupled.

Tuning the memory buffer size allows to reduce memory footprint of the software,\
especially of the client, which can in turn reduce hardware requirements.

Business logic is an example of financial calculations. It can be replaced with any other\
batch processing from a different field, not necessarily financial.
